This lab focuses on basic password security configuration on a Cisco router using the CLI in Packet Tracer.
Students will set the hostname, configure unencrypted and encrypted passwords, test access, view encryption formats, and save configurations. This exercise highlights the difference between enable password and enable secret.

Devices Used:

• 1 × Cisco 2911 Router (R1)

Learning Objectives:

• Configure the router hostname using global configuration mode
• Set an unencrypted enable password
• Encrypt all current and future passwords using service password-encryption
• Configure a secure enable secret password
• Observe and compare encryption types (Type 7 vs Type 5)
• Save the configuration to startup-config

Tasks & Commands:
1. Change the hostname of router

   R1(config)# hostname R1  

2. Configure an unencrypted enable password (CCNA)

   R1(config)# enable password CCNA  
   

3. Exit to user EXEC mode and test the password
   Use exit multiple times to return to user mode, then type enable to enter privileged EXEC mode.

   > exit
   > enable  
   Password: CCNA

4. View the password in the running configuration

   R1# show running-config

5. Encrypt all current and future passwords

   R1(config)# service password-encryption  
  
6. View the now encrypted password again

   R1# show running-config  

7. Set a secure enable secret password (Cisco)

   R1(config)# enable secret Cisco  
   
8. Test which password is required to access privileged mode

   > enable  
   Password: Cisco  ✅  
  (Note: enable secret overrides enable password if both are set)

9. View encryption types in running configuration

   R1# show running-config  
   ! Type 7 is used for `enable password`  
   ! Type 5 is used for `enable secret`

10.Save the configuration to startup-config


R1# copy running-config startup-config  
Destination filename [startup-config]? [Press Enter]

Devices Used:

• 1 × Cisco 2911 Router (R1)

• 2 × Cisco 2960 Switch (SW1)

• 3 × PCs (PC1, PC2, PC3)

Learning Outcomes:

Configure and secure access using enable passwords

Understand and apply password encryption

Differentiate between enable password and enable secret

Save and verify configurations using show and copy commands